chore: add `CONTRIBUTING.md` (#746)
remeda/remeda: CONTRIBUTING.md

# Contributing guide

We're always looking for new contributors and are happy to help you get started! Some ideas:

> - Add a test for a function.

Reviewer: Maybe rephrase it as "find an interesting test case we haven't tested yet" (I trust you to find better wording) to prevent low-effort copy-paste tests from people looking to add open-source contributions to their profiles. We have never had any issues in the past, but I'm afraid of giving people ideas.

- Improve a function's documentation.
- Work on any issue tagged [good first issue](https://github.com/remeda/remeda/issues?q=is%3Aopen+is%3Aissue+label%3A%22good+first+issue%22).

> - Work on any issue tagged [help wanted](https://github.com/remeda/remeda/issues?q=is%3Aopen+is%3Aissue+label%3A%22help+wanted%22).

Reviewer: These could use badges that would also count the number of issues. https://shields.io/badges/git-hub-labels

> 

Reviewer: Should we add "fix a bug or edge-case"?

## Getting started

Requirements:

- Node.js `>=18.20.0`

> - npm `>=10.7.0`

Reviewer: This isn't accurate, we use nvm and should guide people to rely on nvm to use the version in nvmrc so that we can "lock" versions if we need to (we currently use the latest 22 version I think)

Install dependencies:

```bash
git clone git@github.com:remeda/remeda.git
cd remeda
npm install
```

Run a test, and watch for changes:

```bash

> npm test -i src/file.test.ts

Reviewer: :) I always just run `npm t` as it watches everything (after an admittedly long first run of everything).

```

> We have a pre-commit script that will format and lint the project.

Reviewer: We should mention the commands too, in case someone wants to run them before committing.

## Documentation

> Help us make the documentation better! See [`docs/README.md`](https://github.com/remeda/remeda/blob/main/docs/README.md).

Reviewer: Maybe add something about the fact that for most use-cases the documentation is generated from the JSDocs so effectively most documentation PRs wouldn't actually be part of the docs project.

## Guidelines

### Adding a new function

When adding a new function, remember to:

> - Add a Typedoc comment with a description, parameters, signature, an example, and tags.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Add a JSDoc comment with a description, parameters, signature, an example, and tags.
```

> - Add tests for runtime, typing, data-first, and data-last forms.

Reviewer: Maybe add some more guidelines for testing, like preferring one assert per test, splitting typing and runtime tests (which you did mention). Using toEqualTypeOf and ts-expect-error for type tests?

  - For data-last tests, prefer tests using `pipe`, as this better matches real-world usage.
- Add exports to `src/index.ts`.

> - Add Lodash and Ramda equivalents to `docs/src/content/mapping`.

Reviewer: Maybe rephrase this to mention that people should actively look for equivalent functions in lodash and ramda when adding something new even if they don't know those libraries.

> 

Reviewer: We should mention that we depend on type-fest so people should take advantage of types from that library when coming up with new types and not re-invent the wheel.

> ### Input types to consider

Reviewer: This section will probably be confusing to people as a lot of these things are the result of us maintaining the library, and most people don't think like this about a utility for "arrays". What I would mention is examples, like mentioning that people should prefer `<T extends IterableContainer>(data: T)` over `<T>(data: ReadonlyArray<T>)`, and `<T extends object>(data: T)` over `<T>(data: Readonly<Record<string, T>>)`, and then mention in the testing section that testing types should cover as many use-cases of the supported type as possible.

  - Tuple with union values (`[number, string | undefined, boolean]`)
  - Tuple with literal values (`[number, "cat" | "dog", true]`)
- Records
  - Record with string keys (`Record<string, number>`)
  - Record with number keys (`Record<number, string>`)
  - Record with union keys (`Record<string | number, unknown>`)
  - Record with union values (`Record<string, string | number>`)
  - Record with undefined values (`Record<string, string | undefined>`)
  - Record with literal keys (`Record<"cat" | "dog", number>`)
  - Record with literal values (`Record<string, 1 | 2>`)
  - Record with template keys (``Record<`id_${number}`, string>``)
  - Union of records (`Record<string, unknown> | Record<number, unknown>`)
- Objects
  - Object with named keys (`{ a: number }`)
  - Object with union values (`{ a: string | number }`)
  - Object with literal union values (`{ a: "cat" | 1 }`)
  - Object with optional keys (`{ a?: number }`)
  - Object with symbol keys (`{ [Symbol("a")]: number }`)
  - Union of objects (`{ a: 1, b: 2 } | { b: 2, c: 3 }`)
  - Nested objects (`{ a: { b: { c: 1 } } }`)
- `readonly` versions of the above
- `null` and `undefined`

### Design philosophy

> **No type annotations.** Functions shouldn't require type annotations to have good types. This gives the best developer experience. The exception is `piped`.

Reviewer: Let's skip the exception, it's not entirely true because:
```ts
map(piped(filter(isString), only()));
```

Doesn't require type annotations.

> **Have good output types.** One reason Remeda provide "one-liner" functions is if we can have better output types than the defaults. While `data.filter(item => typeof item === 'number')` works, `filter(data, isNumber)` gives a better output type. This is why we have type guards, `hasAtLeast`, `prop`, etc.

Reviewer: Everything in Remeda is "one-liner" so this sentence wasn't clear to me. We can mention that we provide alternative types for built-ins and trivial implementations for the sake of better typing, but even that doesn't cover the whole thing, we also provide implementations if we want to offer a lazy variant or sometimes just so that it could be used dataLast...

I think it's good to mention that output types are a major concern for the library, just think the phrasing and reasoning is different. We want to move errors from runtime to compile time, so better typing means more compile errors and less runtime errors.

Author: my idea behind this was that i wanted to write down our reasoning for why we have certain functions. i guess typing, data-last, and pipes are all reasons, which i might break into a different point (something around working well with the rest of remeda?)

**Readability counts.** The other reason Remeda provides one-liner functions is if they make things more readable. Compare `map((item) => item + 3)` to `map(add(3))`, where we don't need to come up with a name for `item`. This is why we have `constant`, `doNothing`, `identity`, etc.

> **Prefer composition.** We don't provide simple compositions of functions. Having a smaller surface area makes it easier for users to remember Remeda's functions, and easier for us to maintain. We don't have `reject` because it's the same as `filter(isNot)`. An exception is when the composition would be less readable; this is why we have `sum`, even if it's the same as `sumBy(identity)`.

Reviewer: `sum` isn't the best example because I still think it's redundant (but I agree that right now, the alternative isn't great). Maybe use `compact` as a second example, or `zipObj`

> **Minimal implementations.** Implementations should, as much as possible, be small and self-contained. Importing an individual function should add less than 500 B to the bundle size in most cases.

Reviewer: Maybe also add that we want to provide the best possible runtime performance where it counts. We consider both CPU and memory, and we consider both proper complexity, but also JS VM optimizations.

Author: not quite sure how to phrase this?

Reviewer: I guess it would come up in code review

# Contributing guide

We're always looking for new contributors and are happy to help you get started! Some ideas:

- Add a test to a function, testing something that we haven't tested yet.
- Improve a function's documentation.
- Fix a bug or an edge case.

> - Work on [![issues labeled good first issue](https://img.shields.io/github/issues/remeda/remeda/good%20first%20issue?style=flat-square)](https://github.com/remeda/remeda/issues?q=is%3Aopen+is%3Aissue+label%3A%good+first+issue%22).
> - Work on [![issues labeled help wanted](https://img.shields.io/github/issues/remeda/remeda/help%20wanted?style=flat-square)](https://github.com/remeda/remeda/issues?q=is%3Aopen+is%3Aissue+label%3A%help+wanted%22).

Reviewer: nit: no final period, it renders badly, and the badges don't look like part of the text anyway. We can move the period before the badge instead.
```suggestion
- Work on [![issues labeled good first issue](https://img.shields.io/github/issues/remeda/remeda/good%20first%20issue?style=flat-square)](https://github.com/remeda/remeda/issues?q=is%3Aopen+is%3Aissue+label%3A%good+first+issue%22)
- Work on [![issues labeled help wanted](https://img.shields.io/github/issues/remeda/remeda/help%20wanted?style=flat-square)](https://github.com/remeda/remeda/issues?q=is%3Aopen+is%3Aissue+label%3A%help+wanted%22)
```

## Getting started

> We use `npm` as the package manager. We recommend using [`nvm`](https://github.com/nvm-sh/nvm) to manage `Node.js` and `npm` versions.

Reviewer: maybe add that our *recommended* node version is written in the .nvmrc file, for those installing it manually.

> Install dependencies:

Reviewer: should these be ### headers?

Author: i think these sections are too small to get h3 headers

```bash
git clone git@github.com:remeda/remeda.git
cd remeda
npm install
```

Run tests and watch for changes:

```bash
npm test # every test
npm test -i src/file.test.ts # specific test
```

We have a pre-commit script that will format and lint the project, but if you want to run it manually:

```bash
npm run prettier # format
npm run lint # lint
```

## Documentation

Most of the content in the documentation is generated from the JSDoc comments. If you want to work on the design of the docs website or the migration guides, see [`docs/README.md`](https://github.com/remeda/remeda/blob/main/docs/README.md).

## Guidelines

### Adding a new function

When adding a new function, remember to:

- Add a JSDoc comment with a description, parameters, signature, an example, and tags.
- Add tests for runtime, typing, data-first, and data-last forms.
  - For data-last tests, prefer tests using `pipe`, as this better matches real-world usage.
- Add exports to `src/index.ts`.
- Check for equivalent functions in [Lodash](https://lodash.com/docs/4.17.15) and [Ramda](https://ramdajs.com/docs/), and add them to `docs/src/content/mapping`.

> 

Reviewer: Should we add that we expect all PRs to result in 100% coverage and 0 lint warnings?

Author: i'll add a note on coverage. for lint, we already have `--max-warnings 0` in `npm run lint` so it won't pass the precommit script?

### Writing types

> TODO: using `type-fest`, prefer `<T extends IterableContainer>(data: T)` over `<T>(data: ReadonlyArray<T>)`, and `<T extends object>(data: T)` over `<T>(data: Readonly<Record<string, T>>)`

Reviewer: I don't understand this TODO, and the sentence that follows, it's unrelated to type-fest...

Author: i filled in the TODO, does it make more sense now?

### Writing tests

> The tests for `file.ts` live in `file.test.ts`. Some guidelines:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For each file, the tests for that file are located in a file of the same name with the extension `.test.ts` (e.g. `myFunction.ts` -> `myFunction.test.ts`).

Some guidelines:
```

  - Tuple with union values (`[number, string | undefined, boolean]`)
  - Tuple with literal values (`[number, "cat" | "dog", true]`)
- Records
  - Record with string keys (`Record<string, number>`)
  - Record with number keys (`Record<number, string>`)
  - Record with union keys (`Record<string | number, unknown>`)
  - Record with union values (`Record<string, string | number>`)
  - Record with undefined values (`Record<string, string | undefined>`)
  - Record with literal keys (`Record<"cat" | "dog", number>`)
  - Record with literal values (`Record<string, 1 | 2>`)
  - Record with template keys (``Record<`id_${number}`, string>``)
  - Union of records (`Record<string, unknown> | Record<number, unknown>`)
- Objects
  - Object with named keys (`{ a: number }`)
  - Object with union values (`{ a: string | number }`)
  - Object with literal union values (`{ a: "cat" | 1 }`)
  - Object with optional keys (`{ a?: number }`)
  - Object with symbol keys (`{ [Symbol("a")]: number }`)
  - Union of objects (`{ a: 1, b: 2 } | { b: 2, c: 3 }`)
  - Nested objects (`{ a: { b: { c: 1 } } }`)
- `readonly` versions of the above
- `null` and `undefined`

</details>

> 

Reviewer: Maybe we should add something about not needing to test impossible cases that are prevented by typescript, like testing what a function that doesn't take `undefined` will do if we give it an `undefined` value, I've seen people suggest tests like:

```ts
// @ts-expect-error
map(undefined).toThrowError();
```

These aren't useful tests.

# Contributing guide

We're always looking for new contributors and are happy to help you get started! Some ideas:

> - Add a test to a function, testing something that we haven't tested yet.

Reviewer: The word test repeats itself, and we don't expect trivial tests to be missing (for most functions) so maybe:

```suggestion
- Add a test to a function, like an interesting edge-case we didn't think about.
```

- Add exports to `src/index.ts`.
- Check for equivalent functions in [Lodash](https://lodash.com/docs/4.17.15) and [Ramda](https://ramdajs.com/docs/), and add them to `docs/src/content/mapping`.

### Writing types

We pay careful attention to types. Some tips for writing good types:

- We use [`type-fest`](https://github.com/sindresorhus/type-fest) as our type utility library. We also have type utilities in [`internal/types`](src/internal/types.ts).
- We use the [`Simplify`](https://github.com/sindresorhus/type-fest/blob/main/source/simplify.d.ts) type from `type-fest` for simplifying some output types.
- We generally use the `IterableContainer` type from `internal/types` for input arrays. Similarly, we generally use the `object` type for input objects.

<details>
<summary>Examples:</summary>

An example with an array:

```ts
const data = ["a", 1] as [string, number];

// ❌ `T` can be too wide:
function functionName<T>(data: ReadonlyArray<T>) {}

functionName(data); // inside functionName, data[0] has type string | number

// ✅ `T` is more specific:
function functionName<T extends IterableContainer>(data: T) {}

functionName(data); // inside functionName, data[0] has type string

> ```

Reviewer: The example is great, and I don't mind if we don't expand on this, but the main reason for using T as the whole array and not just the item type is that we maintain the _shape_ of the array in the output via mapping, so if the array is non-empty, we can return a non-empty output.

Author: i'll add a note for this. i was trying to think of more guidelines we can put in the writing types section but i haven't thought of any yet. i was thinking of reviewing past PR reviews and looking for patterns
